Yeah, the tape is running.
Okay, and listen, um...
Any questions?
Yeah, if I should ask a question you don't understand or it's a dumb question or you
want to just take a drink of water or something, go ahead and just stop because we can edit
that whole thing out.
No problem.
Okay, thanks a lot.
Okay, I guess the first question I would have is just to ask you.
I guess you've been writing since a very early age, haven't you?
Well, I'm told that I started dictating poems to my mother before I could print, but it's
true that I've been writing for school papers and things.
I started making up stories, poems, and songs since, uh, well, it was well before I entered
school, but I didn't start writing with any connected ambition until I was about 12 or
13.
Okay, did you, uh, did you read science fiction magazines and so forth as an adolescent or
a youngster?
Well, I, uh, I read more books.
There were a cosh of old, archacy old stories at the house because my father read them,
but though there were some weird tales around, my mother wouldn't let me read them because
she was convinced they'd give me terminal nightmares.
So I, uh, didn't discover science fiction magazines until I was 16 or so, but I had read
Ryder Haggard, Talbot Monde, uh, People of that sort, Nelson Bond in the old archacy,
that sort of thing, adventure fantasies, it worked.
I remember when I finally got hold of the Talbot Monde's Gimbrim, which is one of the
better sort of vaguely science fictional fantasies, somewhat like A. Merritt's, I discovered
that I had read the middle part of it in a serial in Archacy and had only read that part
of it and was fascinated to find out what went before and what came after.
Okay, and I believe your, um, your first published story was sometime when you were in college,
wasn't it?
No, when I was in college, I started getting, I started getting published in fanzines, but
I had actually left college and moved to Texas when my first story was published in a professional
magazine.
It was a, an amateur story contest and from amazing stories.
They bought it and, uh, that was sort of a, a spur to my ambition, but I didn't get anything
published in a professional magazine after that for real money until I was around, uh, 22.
Okay, do you remember the, um, the title of your first published story?
Yes, it was called Keyhole and it was in a magazine called Vortex, which died about a year later.
Okay, um, maybe just one more question on this, on your origins as a science fiction writer.
Um, this may sound like sort of a dumb question, but why would you, why did you pick science
fiction and science fantasy as a, your major field of writing?
Well, I, uh, have never been able to answer that question satisfactorily, even to myself.
I started out by saying that I wanted to, excuse me a moment, please.
Lisa, get the phone!
Okay, dear.
Yeah, that's no trouble.
Sorry about that.
That's no trouble.
I had to ask my roommate to get the other phone.
Well, when I was a child, I thought that if I wanted to grow up and be a writer,
I would probably write historical fiction because that was what I liked best at that time,
although I always loved things like writer Haggard, but they were in such old books that I decided
they weren't being published anymore.
Then when I discovered the new, uh, uh, the pulp magazines, The Stounding, Threeling Wander,
that sort of thing, and I saw the fan magazines in the back, the fan scenes and the letters from fans,
I thought, my goodness, there are other people who like this sort of thing, and I,
all of a sudden, I realized not only that I wanted to write for a living,
but that I wanted to write science fiction and fantasy.
Okay, good.
In reading your work, I'm sure you've been asked this before, and I'm not sure if it's
the question you find easy to answer, but obviously you do use, uh, themes having to do with telepathy
or parapsychology or ESP. It plays a big part in your work, and I wondered why that was so
interesting to you.
Well, possibly because, as I said before, I began my reading with such people as writer Haggard,
Merritt, um, Andrew Lang, Yates, uh, the Dunsaney people, the Sirius Fantasy writers,
and they, of course, were all roughly connected, which I found out later, to the Golden Dawn
Order, the magical order in England.
Also, there was a lot of, there's a lot of, uh, of history. Fantasy sort of comes out of
occultism, as it were, and the, what's now called the Neopagan religions, but of course,
they didn't exist at that time. So I thought I was the only person interested in these things,
and when I got into Haggard, Monday, people like that, I realized this is,
this is what I was looking for. There are a lot of people, I think, who look in science fiction
and fantasy for validation of the fact that there are other things in life than,
than you might say, the mundane round and materialism, and those of us who can't get
into conventional religion, which I've never been able to do for various and sundry reasons,
uh, we use that, I think, as a way of looking for what was real in religion behind the dogma
and behind the, uh, all the nonsense and hellfire. That may be a very unpopular answer in the
Bible, though, I'm sorry. No, that's excellent. I happen to agree with that myself, but by the
way, our show is, uh, probably most of the stations that have picked us up are not in Texas
any how, a lot of them back east and so forth, so. Not that I don't like Texas, it's just that I did
have trouble with churchgoers. They thought I was a terribly impious person. Yeah, I know, I'm not a
native Texan either. I have the same trouble. Um, well, listen, one more question on that. Do you
think, um, do you think that such things, you know, as the, uh, the ESP or the telepathy, whatever,
do you think that there is, this is, this is possible that there is evidence that it doesn't
exist? Oh, I know perfectly well it's possible. I've had experience with it myself, haven't you?
Yeah, maybe a little clairvoyance or things like that. Well, I am a, I am a natural psychic,
and when I was able to get into contact with other people who had been in these things seriously,
as I read about them, I wrote about them, and sooner or later, of course, I was,
people communicated with me who had experience in these things and could train me in them.
Okay, that's fine. Um, I'm gonna have to ask you some questions. I suppose you know about Darkover.
I assume you've been Darkover to death, but, uh, I still really love Darkover. How many,
how many novels has that reached now? I think that there are 15 novels and two anthologies.
And I have all 15 been published, or there are some that aren't out yet? Uh, well, there are the
latest one called Hawkmistress. I have seen the cover print, which means it's in the production
process, but it won't be on the stands for a few months. I'm not sure of the absolute date.
That's called Hawkmistress? Hawkmistress. And I've signed a contract for two more Darkover books,
and one is called Tandara House. It's a sequel to Shattered Chain and tells about the heroine of
Shattered Chain, Magda, among the three Amazons. And the third one is the, the next one is called
The City of the Sorceresses. And, uh, for the first time, it goes outside the area defined on Darkover
by what's called the wall around the world and takes some unmapped parts of the planet into
consideration. What, uh, what era of Darkover does, uh, does Hawkmistress deal with? Hawkmistress is a
novel of the ages of chaos. It's sometime between Storm Queen and Tutor Conqueror.
Okay, fine. You've, um, you've never really looked at that as a, as a consistent series or a future
history, have you? I started trying to do that around the time I wrote Forbidden Tower. Uh,
originally no. Uh, I had a feeling, and other writers told me rather cynically, that the life
of a paperback book was about five or six months that nobody, and so I assumed, I realized it was
not safe to assume that anyone who read any of my books had ever read a previous book or would
ever read another book by me. So I worked very hard to make each book stand on its own feet and not
assume any knowledge of previous books. Okay, and also I think, um, I think you've written in a few
places that the, some of the minor inconsistencies that come up, but since these were intended as
separate books, that that's no bother to you at all. That's right. I try very hard to make each
book have its own, or internal consistency and logic, but if the books don't jive with one another,
then the readers are just going to have to use their own imagination to fill in the gaps.
Okay, what about a brief statement on the, uh, the origin behind the idea of dark over the whole thing?
Well, when I was around, uh, 15 or so, I started writing a fantasy novel,
uh, which I put a lot of stuff in from mythology and, uh, ideas that had haunted me since I was a child,
and, um, invented what I thought was the seven telepathic families. And, uh, they were supposed
to be in sort of a lost, uh, alternate world of earth originally, a world where the Spanish
Armada had won and, uh, the new world was Spanish and Indian rather than British and British French
and Spanish and American Indian. And, uh, therefore I sort of went heavily into all that
and then, uh, I realized there was no market for fantasy. So when the whole thing was practically
finished, I shoved it into a drawer and forgot about it. And several years later, it occurred to
me that I could make it into a sort of the same sort of thing that was published in, uh, say,
thrilling wonder stories, amazing stories, the big fantasies by people like Henry Cutner, uh,
which had sort of a thin, or the bracket, which had sort of a thin skin of scientific rationality
by placing them on other planets. So, um, I started to do that with it and the first book,
the sort of Aldoneis, uh, which I completed at about age 19 with another book sort of in the same
theory, uh, Falcons of Narrabedla, one of these was bought by Ray Palmer and the other one was
also bought by Ray Palmer, but he never published it. Then years later, when I'd written a lot of
straightforward, uh, science fiction, Donald Walheim, uh, read the first, you might say, really
interplanetary dark over the planet savers. That was not my title, by the way. I called it Project
Jason, liked it and they asked if I had another book on the same subject. Don is sort of the person
who loves to discover and build up new writers. And, uh, I think he realized even though, through
those very crude early works that maybe I could write something, uh, you know, publishable and good
someday. Okay, fine. Yeah, we talked to Donald Walheim not too long ago. Interviewed him is very
interesting, man. He's a great guy. Um, why do you come back to dark over so often? Well, it started
originally from laziness. I was going to college, putting myself through college and, uh, then later,
so the supporting is say, husband and a couple of children when I married for the second time.
And, uh, my husband was quite ill and couldn't work much and, uh, the babies were still in
diapers and it was the only job I could take that would let me stay home and look after them.
Because, well, it was really too early to cope with the, with that. So I figured if I could sell
books, um, while I was putting myself through college, I could certainly do it while I was
home looking after the kids. And so, um, I started writing and when you have a nice setting in
background, which is fully worked out, the stark over was for me, well, you tend to go back to it
rather than trying to invent a whole new world partly because it's easy and partly because
you realize you haven't, the books are tailored in those days. The books were tailored to such
close commercial restrictions about length and so forth that I realized every time that I'd had to
cut out so much from my own thinking about the book that what I'd cut out would make a sizeable
new book and it was a lot simpler. I figured that since people would read lots of books about
Tarzan or Perry Mason or Nero Wolfe or whatever, people evidently liked reading about stories
with the same background. It was easier to write them than to invent a whole new universe for each
book. That is, as I say at the beginning, it was, it was laziness. Then later, I wanted to get,
give up the whole thing because I thought people must be getting tired of it. And, uh, I told them
John Walheim this and he said, oh no, uh, people are always asking when is there going to be another
book about dark over? And so I decided, good heavens, if it really is a series, maybe I ought to
start thinking of it as a series and take it seriously that way. Okay, excellent. Um, I would
personally take the overall theme of the books as just a conflict between two cultures, you know,
the earth culture and the dark over one, you know, the biggest kind of conflict I see. Of course,
the earth would be technological and imperialistic and so forth and dark over would be more
individual and, um, I don't know, with their telepathic powers, it would be anti-technological
and so forth because of the compact. I don't think so much anti-technological as, uh, thinking that
perhaps there are better ways to do things than by technology. It isn't so much anti-technological as a,
a, a concept that possibly the same kind of technology does not fit every planet,
just as materialism does not fit every human mind, that there are different universes
for different, uh, mental sex as, as you said. I think I'm, I'm a very sort of alternative
culture person myself and I, from the time I was a child, I have never liked the idea
that everybody has to fit into the same lockstep and be, well, they'd now say be clones of my
daughter calls the ordinary kids at school who never think of anything except football games,
clones. Well, I, I felt that way when I was a youngster and so I suppose the idea of leaving
open options and choices for everybody so they can find the kind of lifestyle that suits them best
instead of blambly assuming that everybody has to belong to the same lifestyle. That was something
that I felt very strongly about when I was a kid and I feel even more strongly about than I did
when I was 15. Okay, yeah, I shouldn't have said anti-technological. I wasn't quite fair, but
I would say in my impression, I'm not sure this is correct or not, but you do an even-handed job
most of the time I think in presenting this conflict between the two cultures, but I tend to
think you side with dark over. Would that be right? No, it would not. My very life is dependent on
technology. I am myself a diabetic and dependent upon medical preparations which are very difficult
to get in an anti-techno or a non-technological culture. It is simply that I like, I do what you
call an even-handed job because, well, my husband says it's because I'm a Gemini and it's true that
I am cursed with seeing two sides of everything. When I was a kid and reading in school about what
a terrible person Benedict Arnold was, I still realized that to the British he was a hero and it
suddenly occurred to me that the villain is always, except for really real criminals like mass
murderers, rapists, that sort of thing. Almost every quote a villain unquote is just the victim of a
political conflict. He's the hero of the other side. Okay, what about the compact though? I really
thought you were in sympathy with the compact where you know you couldn't, you couldn't fight somebody.
In this day and age with nuclear weapons every place, I think every human being has to be in
sympathy with the compact or if they aren't there's something wrong with their brains.
At least under the compact if you have only a sword or a knife you can do only one person's,
one person's amount of damage. I suppose it's my emotional reaction to the fact that when I was
15 years old it became possible to wipe out all human life on earth if one paranoid, paranoid
politician presses the wrong button. And I think maybe that's too much power and would like to see
power back back in the hands of individuals over their own lives. I don't like the idea that we are
all, you might say, hostages in a monstrous political and ideological conflict. I can't believe that
God is on one side and that on the other there is only the devil. Okay, good. I was pleased a little
while ago to hear you mention that you're writing a sequel to the Shattered Chain. That's I think my
favorite Dark Overbook. Have some fans overreacted to the feminism of that with the idea of the free
Amazons? As a matter of fact, the real heavy feminists believe that I'm sort of a pussycat,
a Mickey Mouse, because I don't go far enough in men hating. They said I didn't have the courage to go
far enough and create a society where men had actually been eliminated, a true feminist society.
But my attitude is always that's pure fantasy. Men are here and they're going to stay. And the fact
that I don't like some men or the way some men act or even the system under which they live
doesn't mean that I am going to give up relationships with the nice men I found,
with the father of my children, with my grown sons, my brothers and so forth. I think men are very
fine people. I think people are people, but the system of Dark Over has people used to ask me why
the system of Dark Over was so hard on women. And I suppose I looked back historically and realized
that it was, yes, simply because of like as with all pioneers societies, the women get the
ground of it. So like for instance, life among the Eskimos or Tibetans is harder on women too,
in many ways. So I think that possibly the free Amazons were created when I wanted to try
and scratch that. I think the free Amazons were created out of my wish to realize that in a society
so abnormally restrictive, there must be some kind of a safety valve where the society would
blow to pieces. So there had to be some kind of an honorable alternative provided in the society
for women and for that matter for men who simply could not live under the pressures of that kind
of society. Okay. The oath of the free Amazons, did that come fresh out of your mind or was any
kind of origin or impetus behind that? As a matter of fact, it was sort of spontaneous. I was writing
along in the story and I had the slightest idea what was going to happen until Magda ran into the
free Amazons and I thought, well, what would they do to her? What would they do? They certainly
wouldn't kill her because they're peaceful people. And then it suddenly occurred to me, the penalty
for passing yourself off as an Amazon might be to be forced into actually observing their laws.
And so also it was in a way a literary device to get Magda among them to explore it,
explore it from the heroine's eye. But I found myself suddenly just writing down the oath. I
didn't figure it out beforehand. I just said, now what would this group of people do to the
end of people who came among them and that sort of just poured out? Okay, good. Maybe just one
more question on that book. I think it's Rohana, the Lady Rohana, Rohana. I thought she stated
her position very well, even though she could sympathize with the free Amazon, she had still
freely chosen to be married and to take up the family life and so forth. I thought you had a
great deal of sympathy with that position. Of course I do because I lived in a world where
these restrictions became part of our lives and it's quite, a lot of, for instance, very liberated
women. I would like very much to join them in many ways, but having taken on responsibilities,
my kids are here. I can't just, you can't divorce your children. You can't take back the
commitments you've made. It's also true that this kind of freedom is not for everybody. I,
for instance, would absolutely love to sail single-handed around the world or climb Mount Everest,
but I had children until I was too old to do so and nowadays there is really no great reason for me
to strike out and do this. I have a great deal of sympathy and admiration for people who can do
these things, but I can't. Just as I think Rohana had a great deal of admiration for the free Amazon,
her attitude is, well, if I had known about this kind of thing when I was a young girl, instead of
just believing all sorts of lies about them, I probably would have been one too, but it's too
late for that. I had another, you might say that God had meant something else for me.
Okay, what's your reaction to the fan response to Darko? It's been a great response and I
wondered if you ever write books or continue it simply because of fan response.
In a sense I do. I sort of keep a pulse out of what fans are interested in and sometimes when
they bring up a question and discuss it, I don't deliberately write a book to answer this discussion.
It's just that the discussion makes me think and obviously the results of that thought come out
in my writing. No writer works in a vacuum. Some people read science fiction writers read
Scientific American and Discovery in the Smithsonian magazine to find out what's going on in modern
science and thought and then extrapolate from that. I am much more into psychology than I am into
high technology sciences and new advances in medicine and in psychology and psychiatry,
in which fields I read very widely, make me feel now how would this be optimally used in the
society or even sometimes how could this be misused in the society and as a result I tend to come
up with a new book. Everything that goes into a writer's head sooner or later comes out of it in the book.
Right okay. What's your, I don't know, how do your fans communicate with you? What's your
relationship with them? Do they have a regular correspondence with you or do you just meet them
at conventions? Well I meet them at conventions. There's an organization called the Friends of
Darkover and although I didn't have a great deal to do with it, I haven't had a great deal to do
with it for a long time, I meet with these people, I answer their questions, I enjoy talking to them
because in general the people who like darkover are people who think along the same lines that I do
and on the same subjects that I do. Therefore it's interesting to me to talk to them for their own
sakes, not just because they admire my books but because in general people who read my books are
the kind of people who are thinking along the same lines that I am, the subjects I speak of are of
interest to them. Okay before I leave that particular topic of fans, I've always been impressed by the
there seems to me something unique in the field of science fiction and fantasy and that's the
interaction between the authors and the fans. I don't think in any other field of literature is it
so so strong or is there such an interplay between writers and fans? Would you agree with that?
There are certain kinds of people who become terribly emotionally involved in soap operas,
actresses who play unpleasant characters in soaps for instance have been
having yelled at and had their face slapped in public for being so nasty and it's also true that
some of the romance writers fans, romance writers tend to communicate with each other and to keep
in touch with their fans but it's not on a very high intellectual level whereas I think one of the
things that draws science fiction and fantasy people together is the desire to find other people
who think deeply about the serious things in our lives and that's one thing that distinguishes the
science fiction and fantasy fan. They are thinking very seriously about the meaning of human life.
Science fiction deals with the technological society in which we find ourselves and its various
ramifications and fantasy goes even deeper because it forces us to confront you might say the archetypal
images in our own unconscious. The subconscious mind is very deeply tapped during reading fantasy
so people who read science fiction and fantasy are people who like to think very deeply
in fantasy about ourselves and in science fiction about the world we live in and people who think
about these things are not that common because when you walk along the street the first ten people
you meet are not seeing too much fruit in the latest baseball or football game so when you find
other people who are thinking very serious thoughts about the thoughts that are in your mind all the
time you tend to regard them as in a way family they are people you can talk to they speak your own
language. Okay good let me just go on to another work I'm not going to spend too much time on your
works because you've written so much we just don't have time to cover all of it but another one of my
favorites is the house between the worlds and I wondered if there was any impetus or origin
behind that particular book. Yes there was the I was telegraph avenue was sort of the student hang
out of the of Berkeley and walking up and down telegraph avenue every now and then I saw a very
intriguing little shop which had the old Arthur Rackham prints and fantastic pictures and things in it
but there were times when I couldn't find the damn shop and I kept looking for it and I remembered
that there once in Albany there had been a little shop like that which sometimes I could find it and
sometimes it seemed to be on another street there are streets in Berkeley that seem to clone themselves
as it were I will I will go across Derby Street and then it seems that six blocks later I go across
Derby again and I began wondering you know what universe that thing was in when I couldn't find it
and out of that came the whole fantastic structure of the house between the worlds.
I think I know that print shop or bookshop you mean I've looked for one a little place called
Logos it's on telegraph avenue. Logos I can find this is another place and now it's settled down
and is the printment and I can usually find it but originally I'm convinced it was on the other
side of the street and there were times when it wasn't there at all. Okay. Sort of half convinced
you might say. Yeah okay one of the things that interested me too in the book was the I guess
it's the alfar alfar you call them. You hinted at a relationship between the alfar and humanity I
think one of the I think that one of the alfars said that that we they are our children or something
what was the relationship you envisioned there. Well I'm of course very familiar with Celtic mythology
and among the Irish people they believe that the elves or the she or the people of the hills or
whatever you wish to call them people of the hollow hills the elf people this is also true in
Scandinavian mythology are a race of man who were either more or less involved excuse me more or
less evolved than humanity but they seem to have had a singular relationship with them this is of
course where the Kiarion Darkover came from and I sort of wanted to go into my feelings about the
elf folk. Tolkien acted as if they were sort of an alien race whereas I've always felt that they
may there have been a more primitive form of humanity or another ethnic group which sort of
perished before Atlantis and only small groups have been kept on. I don't say that this is even
remotely scientific not being Eric von Daniken or anything like that it's just that it's a good idea
to play with for fictional purposes. I've always wanted to explore the way in which mankind is
always related to the elf people with mountain people the troll folk in legends.
Okay good listen we're at the end of the tape.